even if some children do get back to
school before the end of the summer term
their experience is more likely to be
about social distancing and hygiene
rather than anything of any educational
value what can the panel suggest for a
whole generation of school children who
are now missing nearly half an academic
year and face months of distrust about
social distancing and social contact and
the face further disruption Andy let's
start with you there's obviously some
schools are gonna go back around on the
1st of June some are not what's
happening where you are it's a mixed
picture you know as you say some are
going back they'd rather take their time
to get the right arrangements in place
but I agree we want to get the kids back
in school if we can as quickly as
possible but it's got to be done as
safely as possible and the key thing is
here schools haven't closed it's as if
they've not been doing anything over eat
of course they've been looking at
children of free workers and I think
teachers are feeling a bit stressed from
the teacher basic bashing they've seen
this week so I think we need to sort of
be escalate this Rauh a little bit the
problem is the government dropped a date
on people of the 1st of June without any
real consultation and I think the way to
resolve this is to say to head teacher
in consultation with councils try and
get back by the 1st of June but as soon
as you feel is it's safe possible and
that feels to me the right resolution
where we are today
Camilla well I've got three school-aged
children a year six child a year two
child and a year five child so one of
them can go back the eldest CSX
and I've been asked by her school if I
want her to go back and I've said yes so
we have half term and then I'll have one
of my three children back and the other
two at home that consequently means that
one of us needs to be at home with the
children so work can't go back to normal
if I had been asked if all of the
children should go back I'd have said
yes so you don't you don't have the
safety fears that we heard for some
teach and some of the unions that's not
an issue for you not really because
first of all I've been impressed so far
with what the schools are coming up with
in terms of how they're gonna socially
distance the chart children what
measures they're going to take coming in
we've had a massive dossier for the
elders talking about washing hands
having temperature checks at the door
and how they're going to be separated in
class but equally and I know there is
some lack of consensus over the evidence
that we have so far as to how infectious
children are it's plausible that they
aren't infect as infectious as adults
but it's perhaps not proven however
there have been a number of studies
there's been studies in Australia
studies in Finland studies of a child
who interacted after coming back from
the French Alps and having coronavirus
with hundreds of other children and
didn't pass it on the chief scientists
of the w-h-o has said that school should
go back we've seen schools go back in
parts of Europe I did a story with the
BMA this week that cited the spike in
northern France but actually the Foreign
Minister there pointed out that 1.4
million children had gone back there had
been 70 cases but most of them had been
contracted outside of school but the BMA
were initially supporting unions in
saying that that school shouldn't go
back the way my newspaper The Telegraph
ran a piece with them yesterday where
they somewhat softened that stance and
said that school should go back on June
the 1st if it's safe to do so
so from some of the evidence I seen I
feel happy with my eldest going back and
if the other two were invited to go back
I would say yes I do have sympathy with
teachers but we have to consider that
the infection rate before the lockdown
came in would have been higher than it
is now and arguably teachers could be
more at risk going to the supermarket
than into classrooms
I think measures should be taken but I'm
satisfied we've got to the point and I
believe that Sage that informed
government that it was a the right time
to say a phased return to school from
June the 1st I understand they're going
to be releasing more of their evidence
tomorrow we need to see that evidence so
far it's not been transparent enough
which has led to this confusion so Hanna
let's talk about the experience in
Denmark because Denmark was the first
country in Europe to reopen yeah it's
schools so why was the decision taken
then and how is it has it worked well I
think it's very hard to compare the UK
with Denmark Denmark is a much smaller
country
we have a different political systems
which system which I hope I can talk a
little bit more about based on much more
compromised consultation and of course
we could never send children back to
school without deep consultation with
teachers unions with head teachers and
also parents of course but it did
actually succeed in sending children
back and one thing I was really
impressed with and I as Prime Minister I
had my fair share of should we call it
debates with the teachers union so but
one thing I was really impressed by was
how innovative they suddenly all became
they invents it new ways of going to
school they had outdoor schools
Copenhagen teamed up with cultural
facilities all over town so suddenly you
saw it kids having a having education in
them in our national stadium they start
out singing the national anthem after
that they had their class in the VIP
lounge
you saw kids five-year-olds having their
education or having their classroom in
the Museum of a national museum of art
do you think we could be doing that kind
of thing here why not I mean we have
empty museums we have empty theaters we
have empty sports facilities why not use
those facilities and give a different
kind of education and what I am seeing
in Danish schools yesterday I just saw a
report children who are getting sailing
education on in in the sea so why not
actually use this time to think
differently about education and team up
but it can only be done by local
authorities it can't be dictated by the
government and that's another reason why
I think the governor government needs to
have much more consultation with with
the four nations of this country where
the local authorities with local with
with cities to make sure that this can
happen in a smooth way and I would
really advise to take the heat out of
this because nothing good comes from
this route there has been we've seen
over the last week and jzo your mother
worse in school yes so she's an office
manager in a primary school up in North
Nassim sure
so she's been doing a lot of the things
that we're talking about making these
preparations that they're nervous but
they're trying to adapt and be inventive
she's been ordering in
the peddler bins for tissues for when
kids sneeze they are they've been
measuring out how the desks might work
in different classrooms but I think it's
important to say obviously that every
local authority is completely different
in every school within every local
authority is completely different there
are big classes and there are small
classes there are areas of great
resource there is a great deprivation
and I think it is incumbent on our
politicians to empower Headmaster's and
teachers because they know what's best
for their children and their schools and
I don't necessarily see the need for a
uniform standardized nationwide rollout
I think the dates and the times and the
methods need to be decided by their by
the teachers and but I look I really
love what you said a bit about the you
know the using of cultural institutions
to contribute to the positive learning
of children I think Claire you mentioned
it in your question we have a whole
generation here who else who has sat at
home with these incredibly eager minds
and these desires to be learning and I
think that's definitely one thing that
the theatre industry in its in its
lockdown has been reasonably good at
education departments have been
continuing to to function and to work
with teachers to get actors sat at home
and musicians sat at home to inspire
kids in in that way you know we're not
unfortunately are not gonna be able to
open anytime soon and I think it's
incumbent upon us to try and find as
inventive and as exciting a way to keep
our kids stimulated as possible I think
Chris is Turnage a bit of a mess I think
this first of June announcement because
I mean you had Andy saying you know no
consultation and Haley was talking about
you know try and take the heat out of
this you've got a situation now when
we're on the 1st of June at the moment
anyway it looks like they'll be you know
1,000 possibly 2,000 schools that just
aren't going to open so this this
rollout that the government wanted it's
not going to be happening well I think
there was plenty of advance notice the
measure was announced a few weeks ago in
response to scientific advice something
Jules given mentioned well as Camilla
said there's a load more advice and
scientific evidence going to be
published tomorrow for all of us to have
a look at on Heather's point about the
constituent nations of the United
Kingdom of course Wales Scotland and
Northern Ireland chart their own course
and but as far as England is concerned
we are following the advice we've been
given it is really important when safe
to get children back into school for
exactly the reason
that Claire mentioned in her question
I'm worried that there are children who
are missing out on education children
particularly from disadvantaged
backgrounds who are in a risk of falling
behind in their studies so as soon as we
safely can I think it is important to
get children back into the classroom of
course at no point are we gonna take any
risks with anyone's health the
children's the teachers the parents or
anyone that's why the advice is so
important
it'll get published tomorrow there'll be
further confirmation I think coming next
week but if it is safe to go back on the
1st of June as we currently believe it
is then I would encourage all schools to
do that in a safe way to make sure that
children don't fall behind we don't on
any child to get left behind
particularly those from disadvantaged
backgrounds would gather to be a thing
happen it would have been more likely to
be successful if headteachers had known
about the 1st of June before it was
announced to the nation at large I mean
that the the union of head teacher says
they're first they knew about the first
gyms when they heard on the television
well I don't see there are thousands of
had teachers and tens or hundreds of
thousands of teachers so it's very
difficult to sort of selectively
announce it to tens of thousands of
people and they had teaching unions
education that's exactly what they can
do you saying the only way to tell
schools was to do it through the press
if you make an announcement to ten
thousand or head teachers then you've
effectively made the announcement
publicly so teaching unions have been
closely consulted about the science
they've been on calls we're psychic
government scientific advisers have
breached them on that and I would urge
teaching unions and their members to
positively and constructively engage
with schools to find safe ways of going
back and as James said a moment ago that
would be different for different schools
because they're geography and their and
their classroom layouts are going to be
different but the important thing is we
make sure no children get left behind
and I just like to add to what James
said I think your idea about you know
seeing we can use these empty cultural
institutions is a really interesting
idea and that is definitely worth
exploring because as you said sadly many
of our great institutions like theatres
and museums aren't being used and if we
can find a way of safely getting
children into those that would be a
great and enriching experience for them
for sure and Andy I'm just wondering
what parents are supposed to make you've
got Camilla who very much wants to send
her children to school you've got a
number of schools who are embracing
happily or not and it's difficult to say
from their systems but aren't planning
to go ahead with the first of June
opening and then lots of schools that
aren't what our parents supposed to make
it is it that some schools are less
risk-averse and others or some have made
better preparation how can parents make
any kind of decent assessment they're
probably a little by it all to be honest
because Sorel it's been going on the
last a few days and I'm not sure that
helps parents I would agree with Ella
but had teachers in the driving seat and
let them make the judgment about when
it's safe to open the school his parents
will probably look most to the head
teacher for advice about safety of their
of their kids I think it also should be
done in consultation with local councils
because the fact is the circumstances
will differ from one place to another in
terms of the teaching staff some of them
may be self isolating maybe if you that
they have to deal with them the staff
the Beast physical circumstances before
the school but then don't forget to
pause Fiona that the the r8b our number
the reproduction number varies one reads
into another in the north wing that
we've seen a higher our number than in
the south so you can't blame any council
for taking a cautious approach that's
why I say for the government you know
work in partnership with local councils
absolutely say to them let's get schools
open on the 1st of June if we can but we
respect the fact that if you think a
little longer is needed to get the
arrangements in place and then so be it
and we all work with you in partnership
on that but let's get away from teacher
backing we've seen too much of that over
the last few weeks they have been
working really hard through this period
often teaching kids at home and being
innovative in all the way you would want
them to be and I think we need to sort
of be escalate this round and focus on
practical steps to get kids back in
school when it's safe let me read you
some of the comments we've had in on
social media and Lawrence says if it's
safe for children to go back to school
why isn't it safe at the House of
Commons well we are our children test
subjects with no not at all we're
heading back there was a vote in
parliament yesterday and from the 2nd of
June on wood so that's a day later
these arrangements to vote remotely are
being ended and we will be going back in
because it is important that our
national parliaments job scrutinizing
scrutinizing what the government is
doing properly asking questions things
like Bill committees and delegated
legislation committees haven't been
sitting so let's get Parliament working
showing leadership and doing what we're
asking everybody else to do which is go
to work if you safely can and I think it
was a really poor decision taken by MPs
this week when asking schools to come
fully back we're asking them to come
back on an interim basis but for
Parliament to vote to come back
completely I think that's a really poor
example through the country let's
remember West Coast it was a hotbed for
the spread of the virus just a few weeks
ago
sometimes in Parliament it's a case of
who as we say not as we do and I just
don't think it's acceptable it doesn't
suggest to me that the the premier work
place in the country of taking a
safety-first approach as we normally do
there will be different arrangements for
things like voting so won't be business
as usual but MPs will be doing their job
a committee what Claire was talking I
think in a question is well about
well-being of children and this sense
that yes it will be different when they
go back they will be socially distancing
and I don't quite know how the
curriculum might match up to what it
might have been if we weren't in this
situation but the bottom line is is that
children miss their friends and they
miss that social interaction and for
children that have been alright at home
and are in safe and loving homes
they've been okay and maybe they can
last until September with not too much
damage what's happened here though is
that the government expected 20%
attendance levels at schools throughout
lockdown they hoped that all vulnerable
children and a lot of children off key
workers would attend actually what
happened is less than 2% of children
attended and I'm quite involved with a
charity called the National Association
for the children of alcoholics and their
pools are going up exponentially through
the roof I did a show with Esther
Rantzen the other day and she was saying
child line had been inundated so we do
have to weigh up the risk
here yes there is a risk to children
perhaps of contracting covert 19 and
spreading it to vulnerable adults and
that's not something we want but what is
the risk to vulnerable children for
remaining in homes where they may be
facing abuse or other problems which
greatly affect their well-being much
much more frankly than being socially
distance in a classroom I think that's
an important point to think about and
what is actually the consequence for
children who can't go to school what we
know and I renew vet that very well but
our CEO say the children that if
children don't go to school they
basically forget everything they learned
the full year so we will have children
whom I mean for practically lose a whole
year of Education because they simply
can't remember what they learned six
months ago so I'm a little bit worried
that if it lasts too long we will be
handing we will be taking a little bit
of the children's future twice first
people take almost a year of their
education and then we're also handing
them a very very large bill for an a
lockdown which has become very very very
expensive so there's these balances to
find but I would just again say find a
good balance with also the teachers and
take the heat out of it the only way
this can be solved about is by being
pragmatic Claire what do you think of
what you've heard what's your view well
I can't like has an idea accusing venues
creatively I think what I fear is that
the value of education will have been
taken away from children and I think
this is every child it's it's children
from reception right up to the sixth
formers that have lost out on that a
levels and and I'm actually grieving
because of that but also I think what I
fear is that children there will be
there will be a distrust about social
contact this term maybe but going into
the next academic year and I think the
value and the trust of the way that
schools were before they broke up in the
middle of March has has disappeared and
I feel profoundly sad and
worried for those children I'm a
psychologist I don't work in education
but I can see the psychological damage
that potentially is happening to a whole
generation of children
[Music]
you